In this video, we're going to take a
break from writing code and look at
style of our code. The first place to
start when talking about style and
Python code is PEP 8. So I'm going to
search for PEP 8, and the first result
should be the page of python.org and
you can see that is the case for me,
PEP 8 style guide. So I'm going to open
that up, and you can see that, in fact,
they have got a PEP 8 style guide for Python code.
So a PEP is a Python Enhancement Proposal.
All changes in new features to
the python language start with a
proposal. The proposal is reviewed,
discussed, improved if necessary, and then
either accepted or rejected. Until 2018,
Guido van Rossum made the final decision
about whether to implement a PEP or not.
Since then, the decision is taken by a
group of people. Now you can see who they are
by looking at PEP 0013, so let's just open
another tab here. I'm going to paste the
link in the resources section, as
per normal. So as you can see, any
changes to python are made via a PEP,
and that includes administrative changes, as
well as technical ones. Scrolling down,
we've got this steering committee,
current steering council, I should say.
You may recognize three of the names from the
PEP 8 page we were just looking at.
I'll leave you to read this PEP 0013
if you're interested, and
I'll switch back to the PEP 8 page now.
Alright, so PEP 8 was written by Guido
van Rossum, Barry Warsaw and Nick
Coghlan, way back in 2001.
They've all been involved with Python
for a long time. Guido wrote the first
version and a few subsequent ones,
starting back in 1989. Now I don't
suggest you read all of this document
right away. Most of the code examples
won't make much sense, and you'll find it
confusing. I'm going to go through some
sections that will make sense.
After that, check back in here as you
learn more about Python. So the last two
paragraphs of the introduction are worth
reading. This style guide evolves over time.
Python 3 has some features that weren't
available in Python 2, and the guide has
had to change to deal with new features.
The last paragraph is important. If you
work on a project that has its own style
guide, then that should take precedence
over this one. For example, google have
their own Python style guide. If you end
up working for Google, then your code
should conform to their guide.
Alright, so moving down, read through the
next section - A Foolish Consistency is the
Hobgoblin of Little Minds. So it contains
some useful advice on when you should
not follow a style guide. Point number
three is important; Don't change code to
make it conform to a certain style, when
there's no other reason to be changing
that code. A simple typing error could
break the code and cause all sorts of
problems. Unless you're prepared to
explain why you broke a major program,
such as Google search engine, just
because you didn't like the name of a
variable, then don't do it. If you're
going to be changing the program anyway,
and it's going to be tested afterwards,
then you could take the opportunity to
clean it up. I'm going to skip, as we go
down, most of this Code Lay-out section.
That's not because it isn't important -
it is - but it contains a lot of Python
statements that we haven't seen yet.
So moving down to the tabs and spaces
section, the recommendation there is to
use spaces to indent your code. That's
important for programmers from other
languages. If you're used to using tabs,
then you should use spaces in Python.
If you don't, and your IDE said to use tabs,
then you'll get problems on Python
3 when you open your code, written to use
spaces. So next is the Maximum Line
Length. Now pay attention to this section.
These suggested line lengths are intended
for when you edit Python code in a
terminal, which is typically 80
characters wide. As you'll see soon, the
JetBrains IDEs suggest 120 characters,
rather than 79. Google suggest a maximum
line length of 80 characters, with a few
exceptions. Stick to 72 characters for
comments and docstrings, because it's
very hard for tools to format them. For
this course, I'll generally stick to less
than 80 characters for the line length.
That makes it easier for you to see the
code in the videos, and allows the code
to display correctly in an e-book.
Alright, so moving on. I'm going to skip
to the Naming Conventions section.
So the Naming Conventions section starts
with an admission, that a lot of the code
in the Python libraries are quote, a bit
of a mess, unquote, as far as sticking to
the naming conventions. This style guide
was written in 2001, and Python had been
used for 10 years before this guide was
written. When you come to use code from
the standard library, which we'll be
doing in later videos in the course, you'll
find that many things don't conform to
this guide. Don't worry about it.
The developers have read point three above,
which I talked about earlier in the
video, and not changed the style just for
the sake of it. We've used variables in
our code so far, so let's see what the
guide has to say about variable names,
and that's specifically, as we go down a little
bit further now, in the Function and
Variable Names section. Variable names
should follow the same convention as
function names, which means they should
be in lowercase, with underscores used to
separate words if necessary. Mixed case,
which is the convention in languages
like Java and C++, should be avoided. Okay,
so bookmark this document in your
browser and refer back to it as we cover
more Python statements in the course.
Alright, so back in IntelliJ, you can't
actually see it at the moment because
of how compressed I've got my screen, so
that you can see the videos in a good font,
but there's a vertical guide in
IntelliJ set at 120 characters. Now what
I can actually do, is I'm going to
temporarily just put some long code in
here, just so we can see it. I'm gonna put
a hash there for a comment and I'm just
going to paste some code, so keep pasting,
and there's the vertical guide that I
was talking about. Now obviously, you can
see we've got some warnings, now that
I've done that. We've exceeded the 120
characters. So this is basically the
vertical guide I'm talking about, currently
set to 120 characters. Alright, so I'm just
going to undo that change, or rather
delete that line. Now if you want to
conform to the Python style guide, 120
characters is too long. The JetBrains
IDEs allow you to change the
position of that guide. You can even set
more than one, which is useful. So to do
that, let's have a look at how to do that.
We're gonna to go into File Settings.
Then you need to click on Editor and then Code
Style and I'm already there, you can see.
Now, you can see under visual guides, I've
got nothing in there at the moment,
although it does say hard rap at 120,
above that. Now most modern IDEs will
have a similar setting. I want comments
and docstrings to be no longer than 72
characters, and code to stop at 80
characters. So to achieve that, and the
visual guides down here, I'm going to
enter 72 comma 80 in this box, and click
on OK. And now you can see, we've got
these fake vertical guides to show us
where 72 and 80 characters are, and now I
can see it clearly on my screen,
so that's good. Now there's still the darker
guide at 120 characters, which we can't
see, unless I go back and do what I did
earlier, and that's set by that hard
wrap at setting, which you saw at the top,
and you can go back into the settings to
change that if you want. But I'll leave
that, as is. Alright, so what I want to do,
though, is finish this video with a
challenge. You need to open up the escape
char.py from the previous section,
and I've actually copied it into this
project, so open that up.
Now this doesn't conform to the PEP 8 style guide.
I don't want you to change the code at the
moment. That's because I'm going to show
you a safer way of changing it in the
next video. Your challenge is simply to
identify the things that don't conform
to the PEP 8 style guide. There are three
problems with this code, which will need
changing on 6 lines, but again, don't
change them yet. Just work out what these
things are - the things that don't conform
to the PEP 8 style guide. I'll go over
them, and show you a cool way to fix them,
in the next video.